hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast production of neonews
today.com I'm your host Dylan Grabowski
in this episode of the smart economy
podcast I sat down and spoke with Gregor
success the executive director at swarm
swarm is a decentralized storage
platform and Communication Service
comprised of a collective of
peer-to-peer nodes the project was
conceptualized in 2015 and initially
founded within the ethereum foundation
but has since spawned a New Foundation
of its own to Foster community and
development in this conversation Gregor
and I talk about what the blockchain
space was like in 2015 the importance of
decentralized storage in web 3 data
ownership and privacy interesting use
cases housewarm operates and much more
more just a reminder nothing said on
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens then nothing should be
taken as Financial advice and that the
host or guests May hold tokens discussed
in any given episode with that said I
really enjoyed chatting with Gregor and
I hope you enjoy the conversation too
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast forgive me I'm not even
going to try and butcher your last name
we're here with Gregor Z the director of
the Swarm Foundation how are you doing
today Gregor all good hi everybody glad
to be here excited for the upcoming
discussion yeah really excited to have
you join in the past month your the
second sort of distributed file storage
architecture focused type of person
we've had come join the Pod so I'm
really excited to talk about swarm and
swarm Foundation but before we jump into
all of that when I was researching you I
had a really fun time learning about
your background you've worked with music
festivals you were the creative director
for an entrepreneurship platform you
marketed stage shows you did Outreach
for documentary about the Maya uh
startups and then you got into the
blockchain space so could you just share
a little bit about your your winding
path and and how you ended up at swarm
Foundation yes sure it actually made me
uh feel a little bit old because there's
a lot of things uh have happened and I'm
grateful for all the experiences in a
way when I meet sometimes people from 10
years ago or something like that and
they ask me what I do today I say uh
kind of the same thing just a different
genre it's always somehow Freedom was
always the center of Peace uh in uh what
I was doing in this way it was uh either
freedom of the mind or just of the
thought so kind of working also more on
the other side uh in the underground not
uh in the mainstream so I guess you know
there we see kind of a lot of also value
alignment and in a way in a way we can
see people on a really good Festival on
an underground Festival they share
surprise a lot of values with the hacker
Community or the crypto community so
same things different genre uh in a way
it's also I've always worked on things
that I felt with my whole heart and in
this way it's kind of I am grateful for
my past experience it feels like a
little bit as a journey where it's kind
of continuing from the previous chapter
to the to the next one trying to upgrade
it I guess in crypto space
I ended my uh there in a way because it
actually it was one of the first
ethereum meetups in Vienna in 2015
something like that and there was
vitalik and it clicked uh for me uh on
several things as it was about ethereum
was about decentralized business models
and before you know we also had like a
project called Urban tribe and things
like that where we were really about
decentralization before even knowing
about the centralization I even wrote
about it in my bachelor thesis uh even
though I kind of I got strange looks
from my professors at that point and
essentially the the idea of the world
computer was really addressing many of
the interests that I had and I guess
um then the rest is history so uh Swan I
found about sworn it was the answer to
also the peer-to-peer storage that I was
looking into at that point I was doing
also my masters in cognitive science
looking into user modeling and there's a
lot of science news in modeling and it's
quite scary what can be done with really
sometimes it seems innocent data for
those who know how to analyze it and
because of that I never wanted any
solutions in that sense would be stored
on centralized servers because it's just
a Honeypot of really very sensitive data
that in the wrong hands could be really
abused so I would even argue sometimes
even more than just the usual kind of
data that leaks in the sense of
passwords and things like that so once
somebody really gets to know your
personality profile your habits things
about you they can press some buttons
let's put it this way yeah I mean even
here we were supposed to like the
Equifax data breach there are these
quasi financial institutions that are
supposed to protect our information and
yet their susceptible able to breaches
to hacks to losing our information so
this is this isn't something new it
sounds like it's been a problem for as
long as you've known about ethereum so I
guess before we delve into the solutions
that swarm can provide the greater world
what was the perspective of ethereum
when you first went to that Meetup 2015
it's still brand spanking new what were
the types of individuals that were going
to those meetups who were the types of
people you were meeting what was just
like the general ideology of ethereum
and building the world supercomputer
back then great question so I'll
probably never forget that Meetup it was
something like 10 to 15 people uh there
and here essentially I would say we were
all lost and in a way I kind of heard a
little bit of this sci-fi movie music in
the background you know just kind of
felt like uh imagine uh majority was
essentially introverted developers none
of us really knew what it's all about
myself I did not really understand how
blockchain works there was vitalik doing
this presentation I was kind of running
some Concepts about data markets with
vitalik which I did not understand his
answers I I just cut it out straight so
but at the same time there was this
feeling we're on to something so we're
on to something and it's something that
should be you know worked more on uh
that should be uh we should stay in the
pursuit of that so it felt uh even
though nobody was saying this I think
even vitalik might have said something
like we're not sure if we are going to
do it something like that we don't know
yet exactly all the nuts and bolts but
um it felt that if we are successful at
this it can have a positive impact on
the society if done right yeah I
actually use a lot of italics
presentations as a benchmark for how
much I've learned in this space so I'll
go back every now and then and watch
something that I watched years ago and
if I can understand it a little bit more
then I feel like I've made progress in
building my knowledge
because it was you know even even like
base the concepts like back then this
was before ethereum's Ico so it was like
the combination of Open Source and
crypto tokens and what is an Ico and
everything was strange but it was good
were you already thinking about how
blockchain could be used in like with
swarm were you already thinking of oh we
can create these decentralized data
storage entities servers whatever you
want to call them was this something you
were already thinking or were you just
kind of along the lines of I'm seeing
how data can be manipulated I'm kind of
getting a little bit scared and then
also here's this cool blockchain thing
in the background or were you starting
to connect the dots and see uh what
could be possible so for me I was back
then I was already thinking and doing
also some research papers within my
studies on uh how the data be shared and
handled and hearing the presentation it
was just like yes this is what I've been
looking for it was at that point I was
still thinking I'm still involved with
that how to how to actually create data
marketplaces you know what we call Fair
data economy so in a way how to unlock
the value that we see now in the big
Tech Titans and give it to the people so
to speak you know make it make the
distribution Fair it's so I kind of
approached this in a way I could say
like from from the layer to perspective
and then at that point uh Swan was just
a death team within ethereum Foundation
I met Victor in 2016 and we clicked and
we've been working uh well together
we've been supporting also a large form
but it turned out that also speaking
about data marketplaces for the people
so to speak well until there's until
soon is ready basically it's not
possible to do it uh without doing major
compromises so in a way everybody liked
the vision of what we are doing but it's
a bit like selling houses on Mars but
everybody said like oh it's a great
house but how do I get to Mars and swarm
is the answer so in late 2019 uh Swan
started to graduate from ethereum
foundation and this was this was kind of
also the moment when we actually joined
the forces because there was also a need
for a swarm to become an organization so
to to have this uh complementary part to
the development team and uh yes since
then since then I'm full time on Swarm
did you or anyone from your team go to
East Denver this year uh yes uh we had
some people there I I wasn't there but
yeah there were some of our team members
uh maybe from what they've shared with
you the crypto and blockchain space in
2023 looks way different than it did in
2015 and way different than it did in
2019 so what are some of the comparisons
from back then to today what kind of is
similar what's different and what might
surprise you about where we've landed
today as an industry whether we've how
far we've come or what we've missed
that's a great question so definitely
the 2015 time and today there were so
many different waves you know from the
let's say the the bear and bull cycles
they always also change a bit the
structure new people are joining and
right now I think what I like especially
this year I think there is a bigger
shift uh towards um let's say the
regenerative Finance towards uh uh solar
Punk Movement we hear a lot and then at
the same time we hear about the lunar
punks uh and uh in my opinion they work
well in uh complement they address uh
different topics so I think this year
has become also with the growth of the
Dolls a lot more social impact driven
and this is this is what I like a lot I
remember in 2016 there was the da hack
and I still have some domains even from
back from the day and I was taught like
for three years don't use the name Dao
you know now Dao is back in uh fusing
and I think yeah we are we are in for a
great new all episodes so I'm feeling
very optimistic there's also a lot more
plural back in the day there was just
one chain so um I mean besides Bitcoin
uh let's say one evm compatible chain
today there's really a wide range of
choices uh I think the ecosystem is a
lot more diverse and we see how this
openness kind of can feed into the other
projects and vice versa so it's good I
think it's good times to be part of the
whole blockchain web3 decentralized
movement however we call it I agree I've
been here since 2017 working in the
space for someone who's maybe newer to
the space it might be a little scary
with the regulatory concerns that are
popping off around the world but some
jurisdictions are a little bit more
friendly to others I don't necessarily
think we have to go into that topic
right now but you did bring up Dows and
I've always thought that decentralized
file storage systems are perfect use
cases for Dows because if we want to
share files associated with our Dow if
we want to get our members up to date if
we want to store meeting minutes
somewhere that are accessible to
everyone then something like swarm or
some other file storage Network on the
back end is going to be used is going to
be very valuable so are you guys finding
that at the Swarm Foundation you're
beginning to collaborate with Dows more
so or less so is is there a noticeable
Trend could you just share a little bit
about that uh sure yeah that's a that's
a great observation so I would say that
the swan really fits for the Dallas of
course there are several types of dials
different use cases and yes there is
also a long-term goal of swan eventually
to become adults so um that's definitely
I would say on the table so to speak we
do see that uh there's more dials
approaching us that there's the question
uh the more the complexity of the Dallas
is growing the more there's also the
need for data you know so it's like
either the proposals need to have uh
bigger descriptions or um just more
metadata for it or uh the the whole
processes are more more complex so we do
see that in a way that uh soon can be a
very substantial part of uh Next
Generation dolls of a fully
decentralized house seen also in the
past that some does already tried to go
full decentralization route but the
technology just wasn't there I'm
speaking here uh of colony I think
colony is doing great job they've been
also working on it for quite a while and
there's been one blog post a couple of
years ago how they needed to scale back
so definitely seeing such use cases in
the future would be just amazing in a
way I think this also fits the the more
even bigger narrative when we speak
about web3 essentially can there be vap3
without decentralized storage I don't
think so so it's uh I think here
decentralized storage maybe is not as
attractive as the new DFI kind of things
and yield farming and stuff like that
but it's a very crucial part of the tech
stack that's a great segue I want to
talk a little bit more about swarm but
before we get there
why should someone who isn't into web3
like web3 natives like you and me why
should they care about decentralization
like why should my mom care about
privacy about data sovereignty about
data interoperability like how do we
bring the importance and the weight of
this technology to the mainstream to
just the average user who doesn't care
about what protocol the internet runs on
top of or how their text messages work
how can we convey the importance of
decentralization and these these various
different types of decentralized
networks excellent question I would
maybe try to answer this uh you know
maybe a bit weird way so I would kind of
draw parallels with the vegan movement
and here a disclaimer I'm a vegan so I'm
probably also a bit biased here but uh
what I mean and I will return this one
what I mean with that is so if somebody
is asked why did you become a vegan
there are several factors that can play
into that it's uh some do it because of
their health some do it because they
want to avoid suffering of the animals
some do it because it's uh for the
well-being of the planet Etc it's
different different reasons some are
stronger some less and in a way uh when
we think about decentralized storage and
privacy it's kind of the same very
similar so besides the point that vegan
people are the most unpopular people to
invite to a dinner privacy people are
probably the most unpopular people to
discuss like the newest social media
apps you know but there are several
factors and there is maybe you the most
of the time there is this concern of
security and uh three letter agencies
spying on us and things like that and
it's all about freedom and that's
definitely it is important there are
many people who say it's not and I've
seen now like on Twitter I actually
saved some bookmarks like people posting
statements and tick tocks have all my
data I don't care but that's like coming
to the snowden's uh quote uh that
basically freedom of speech if you say
you don't care about freedom of speech
that just means maybe you don't have
something to say about it but that
doesn't mean that freedom of speech is
not important and in the same way yes
privacy is important for that but I
would say it goes even further today's
world is digital and the digital
influences the physical so we see the
kids going to a concert not for the good
music but for the stylish selfie on
Instagram and to say I was there and at
the same time with all what I mentioned
before user modeling and the tech going
really deeper first it's surveillance is
not selected the machines have made it
really cheap and we are all surveilled
our data is just recalled when it fits
some somebody's needs the other thing is
the less privacy we have the more we
know about people which I would say
literally translates to our economic
power online it's basically how do we
negotiate with the services how do we
protect our mind from impulsive buying
from fake news from uh essentially
manipulation so in a way the deeper we
go the more it's about the freedom of
the mind is uh Harare saying basically
today's governments and corporations
this the main Battlefield they see is
the Battlefield of the Mind
so it's like all the data that we pull
in that we generate by just being online
this data tells a lot about us now the
ironic part is that it's always this
mouse and Cat game so Google's or
Facebook they're chasing 14 bits of
information with non-aligned business
models and they make them the
conclusions and probably Google thinks
I'm not very much a lot more different
person as Facebook probably things on
Twitter so they all have some actually
false ideas about me but they do create
services and actions based on the ideas
about me or us and the users so
economic power in itself I think it's
important and if you speak about the
fair distribution of the value that's a
requirement the other thing is it's in a
way we've been really taught online some
very very weird practices you know
imagine if you'd be on a day and then
somebody comes with a t-shirt saying
Facebook on it and they would just sit
next and they would say don't mind me
continue with your date I'm just taking
some notes to know what to say later you
would be like hey man what the hell you
know so but online it's totally okay
it's totally okay if our Postman comes
and says hey I read your mail and you
should get this offer if our Postman
would say that that would not be cool
and probably not accepted and it's kind
of I think here also when it comes to
personal data we need to think about
this that the current patterns that we
are using are just wrong and they're
working for a handful of people and
corporations now the last point in that
sense I would say is again we generate
so much data how could this data work
for us and this means we should have
this data in one spot we should be able
to run our own open source machine
learning scripts models Etc get insights
about ourselves have this support that
maybe uh for medical well-being Etc the
data should work for us and this can
only happen when we reclaim it so I
would say there are several reasons and
yeah sorry for such a long answer no
that that's a phenomenal response and I
think you did a a great job of kind of
leading me into the next question so if
we're gonna own our own data in a way
that only we have access to it we're
going to need to use a new type of
network so this is where swarm might
come in where I can store my data on a
decentralized storage Network so it's
it's we're we're almost halfway through
the episode and we still haven't even
described what swarm is so could you
just give us like an elevator pitch or
like a high level view of what swarm is
sure thing Sloan is decentralized
storage and communication platform
there's again there's different
interpretations some people just kind of
understand it a lot easier when we say
it's kind of like BitTorrent on steroids
the problem with BitTorrent is popular
content can be downloaded very fast but
with unpopular content it just
disappears so this is one of the big
questions that swarm also tackles how
how will the unpopular content be
available and our personal data can be
considered unpopular content because
yeah actually we don't want it to be
popular and that everybody downloads it
you know so
so for this phone uh really made some
breakthroughs and Innovations in the
field how uh how the storage incentives
are uh done how basically it really can
work in a very decentralized manner now
to be part of swarm one needs to run a
program a client we call it a client
program it's called B
and it's in a similar way as with other
uh peer-to-peer data sharing solutions
from the past there is a certain amount
of storage contributed to the network
and this this amount of storage it's
like it's about what what's the unique
thing with Sony it's one Global hard
drive it's not a file sharing service
that I would share a folder with my
files and somebody else would download
the whole file no when a file gets
uploaded to the network it gets broken
down in small chunks and these chunks
gets get distributed across the network
this is important for several reasons it
adds more resilience it makes it more
decentralized so uh someone who has the
feature of upload and disappear one does
not need to run a node to store data on
the network it's also it protects the
node operators because node operators
don't actually know what they store they
store just little pieces of the files
and of course there is also redundancy
so if one node operated with some chunks
goes offline there's the data still
available and this this also has some
profound consequences it's um in the
majority of other Solutions one they're
in a way
marketplaces one does an agreement with
uh I if I want to store data I make an
agreement with somebody else who offers
storage
here with swarm this agreement so to
speak under quotes is done with the
network which means there's no
censorship there's nobody nobody who can
say you are not allowed to store the
data storm is fully permissionless with
how the chunks are also being
distributed it's also it adds layers of
privacy to it and because of all this
how the incentives work and the features
that I mentioned there's also a very
strong communication protocol working
within Swann which enables so-called
zero leak communication so if somebody
observes the network they don't even
know that two people might be talking or
they cannot see any metadata so this is
just on the base layer now one of the
things that really very excites me is
what this architecture enables and it
enables uh it's basically this chunk
based architecture enables that new
protocols new Solutions can be built on
top of some like the data Marketplace
that I mentioned for the data unions or
new kinds of dials uh maybe those who
negotiate with centralized tech
companies or uh data holders how to deal
with that data so what we say within
swarm is that we are empowering digital
Freedom by making data Unstoppable and I
think this holds very true I'm ready to
be challenged on that front by anybody
that's awesome that you have such a core
philosophical Drive especially in this
space where you can have like salty
token holders yelling at you or people
mad that something isn't delivered as
quick as they initially thought it would
be so to have that kind of like
intrinsic Drive is almost unnecessary in
the space swarm has a lot of differences
but also a lot of comparisons to other
file storage networks like Sia storage
Neo FS ipfs so maybe get a high level
without having to go into detail for how
swarm is different from each different
file storage Network what's kind of like
the key differentiator that separates
swarm from your competitors I would say
that we are we are really set out well
to be an enabler of what we call third
data economy so fair data here standing
sort of as an alternative to
surveillance capitalism and why we can
do this it's exactly because of our
architecture and the incentive system
that we have incentive mechanics so uh
there are different solutions first okay
maybe before going into differentiators
I would say that I need to express that
myself I'm not a small maximalist so I
do see a future where different
solutions will work and be complementary
in the same way as we see today several
databases are being used for different
use cases or within even one app there
will be different economic takes also
and some networks might have a better
value proposition for backups some for
other things the good thing with swarm
and with all these chunks and
communication protocol and things that I
said it's I think it can be the most
vibrant place when we speak about
real-time data when we speak about data
exchange when we speak about active data
and in this is how also sworn was
conceptualized from the beginning it's
the hard drive to of the world computer
so in a way what I see and hope that we
will be successful at is uh what we call
the fair data economy narrow waste
narrow waste has been used to describe
also the Internet Protocol and we see
with the Internet Protocol it's actually
very tiny piece in the whole of the
internet but underneath it combined
devices different networks and above it
we see all kinds of solutions from World
Wide Web to even the blockchain and
things that we are speaking about so in
that sense storm I think can unite like
different data sources make the economy
buzzing pun intended here and um we can
hopefully we can see like uh new things
emerge like uh next uh generation data
unions dials that we mentioned solutions
that empower the individual
permissionless publishing hopefully you
know we will speak in five years or 10
years and we will be like wow people
have created really cool stuff if you
look back to five years ago some of the
things that are happening right now in
the web 3 space are just kind of out of
this world I can't even imagine what
it's going to be like in five years
what's the incentive model the incentive
mechanism for people who download the B
client and start participating in the
hard drive for the world supercomputer
what tokens do I receive what's the rate
at which I receive reward words do I
have to sign a contract do I have to
donate a certain amount of hard drive
space for a certain amount of time could
you just share a little bit about what
that looks like sure so there's
different users Of Swarm so one can be
running different types of a node it can
be an ultra light note light note and a
full note and based on the decision what
to do there are some specifics so for
ultra light notes it's just about
accessing data on Swarm let's say I have
a website on Swan Song actually sworn
Foundation does have website on format
there's also a growing number of other
websites but they did that just for
ultralight
users and this can be done very simple
one installs the desktop app the usual
procedure a couple of clicks the node is
running that's it now the contract can
be topped up and this basically the top
up can enable are also more more
capacity for uploads so you can
essentially raise the threshold for
uploads this this would be interesting
for those who also want to store the
data or who want to actively use
applications like fat Drive which is a
decentralized Dropbox and back-end for
developers or to access any any other uh
things on uh sorry now this is also
quite suitable to have it on your
computer just as a background service
you know to connect it as uh to connect
to sort and here we are working on the
ecosystem side with a very interesting
concept that we call web3pc I can go
into that later now running a full node
full node is actually running the same
software but
um it means that the person the node
operator or put on the full node uh if
they want to be part of the reward
system they need to stake 10 bus tokens
BCC tokens uh the with swamps sword
Network's token and then the rest just
happens on its own because uh every node
operator becomes part of the global hard
disk as I mentioned so there's some
thinking already happening and the data
will be automatically stored uh already
on that note so and we have the
so-called shelling game for the storage
incentives it's happening every Epoch so
in a very stable frequency so to speak
there's one there's a check who's
holding a certain type of certain data
and if they prove they have the data
they get the reward the first we did the
storage incentive upgrade release last
December and this was you know going
back to what you said that we have
strong also intrinsic motivation so this
storage this version of storage
incentives was in the work for seven
years there was so many times when we
needed to go back to the drawing board
because our team found some hacks so to
speak it's really hard problem to do it
in a decentralized way a good month ago
there was also the manual price
calibration of the network so this was a
turning moment when running a b note
should be slightly profitable so to
speak should cover the cost and then
also generate some earnings and we see
we see the network growing since then we
see also the first numbers kind of show
that usually are not a single node kind
of means this draw about two times per
week which uh right now that really
actually good numbers good numbers uh so
uh and that's all that's needed to be
done and one can be part of the the FED
data economy now the exciting thing is
that these building blocks actually also
enable and we see uh there are going to
be new incentives coming in the future
right now there's just storage and
bandwidth incentives so storage
incentives reward for storing bandwidth
for serving uh the data but we can see
uh we expect in the future also to be
like the insurers incentives and also in
a way like I would say fair data they
fight so we would expect new projects to
come up with their Layer Two incentives
than their tokens that kind of Leverage
this basic building block
and but the current status of the
network is it possible to like stream
videos into stream audio yes and no so
uh we need to be precise we need to be
precise about it if we are speaking
about streaming audio or video from uh
some video that's already stored on the
network that works yeah bank and one can
use it today now if we are speaking
about live video there are some
constraints because as I mentioned
before the data needs to be broken up
distributed across the network so there
is there is some latency to be expected
there is ongoing work also by uh some
ecosystem by community members to tackle
this we see actually latency also coming
when people are streaming Zoom to
YouTube that there's sometimes can be
one minute of latency so I guess we can
accept that latency there has been
actually also at Eid bernin last year a
winning project that did Dynamic nfts
and they were streaming live event into
an nft that was stored on Swarm so
that's exactly you know like an example
of these new use case is that we
wouldn't think uh think of but Swan's
architecture in such cases comes to
shine because Dynamic nfts are
relatively trivial thing to do on so on
while it might be quite complicated on
other decentralized storage Network I
know that it was kind of a contentious
issue when swarm introduced the token
um and it's been a few years since then
and I've always grappled with this
myself do we use blockchain's native
token or do we create a Project Specific
token so I'm curious to hear about the
role of the buzz token in the Swarm
ecosystem and what were kind of the
conversations you and your team were
having internally when debating whether
to use like a native eth to pay for
storage or to create this new token that
will be used in the Swarm ecosystem
excellent question we had we had a lot
of discussions about this and I would
say even the change came about in the
second half of 2019 and it goes also to
the beginning of our conversation so
2015 was a different time than we see it
today when Swan was conceptualized it
was meant to be part of the world
computer there was only the ethereum
blockchain today's reality is we see a
lot of evm compatible blockchains even
also other things like high gas costs
and higher than a second costs so on
today is not really using the ethereum
mainnet for this reason exactly so we
are currently using diagnosis chain but
we also look at other chains so the
long-term scope of storm also changed in
the sense that in the future we would
like to see Swan having multi-chain
support so that all the evm chains would
be using the same swarm and for this to
happen it does need to have its own
token also its own token does give a lot
more stability to the network as the
price of the token is linked to the
network and its value proposition not to
other economic forces at play so uh it
would add you know like we see ethereum
and all the cryptocurrencies they go up
and down it's it's a very still very
volatile world and it would add another
layer of complexity and risk to the
network itself and especially when we
want to also manage our data when we pay
for how long the data should be stored
on the network so uh going forward the
bus token was actually the only solution
that we saw now personally what I would
like to see in the multi-chain future I
would like to see that all this is maybe
even hidden under the hood so that
whatever change is being used that the
swan can be used in a seamless way that
there is some defined magic happening
under the hood Translating that talking
to the bus token and so forth so the the
ordinary users and also developers don't
really need to Grapple with this uh this
complexity now at the same time you know
it's like we are kind of a sworn in a
bit similar situation because we would
also it would make it a lot simpler if
all the projects on top of swan would be
using just one token but those projects
will also have their own token in a way
that's part of the ux challenges uh of
The Wider Community to tackle going
forward that there will be countless
tokens so how do we actually manage that
but uh we do need uh on token yeah
that's a really interesting response
because swarm has been building since
what 2016 2017 yeah even earlier so 2015
15 I would say so yeah I mean just the
the landscape uh shifts in 2019 we were
barely even talking about l2s or
competitive l1s and now in 2023 you know
Cosmos is here to stay arbitrum optimism
they're launching so we have so much
more complexity in the interoperability
between various different types of l1s
l2s different networks they're going to
communicate with one another uh so that
makes sense that you can't just use like
a native eth asset because you might be
collaborating or there might be other
chains that are tapping into the Swarm
Network my day-to-day job I cover Neo
which is an alternative L1 that's been
around since 2015 so this next question
that I have is kind of very near and
dear to my heart and it might be
different for decentralized storage
networks versus public blockchain
networks but older projects just aren't
sexy you have have brand new tokens that
everybody's talking about the airdrop
comes it launches to the moon and
nobody's talking about a project that's
been building for seven years so what is
the kind of if there even is an issue
with attracting developers to come build
on Swarm a project that's been around
for eight years now it's not new it's
not shiny but there's a lot going on
under the hood
what are the challenges or maybe even
the opportunities that are associated
with working for a project now that's
eight years old in an industry that
loves shiny things have you found issues
or opportunities for attracting new
developers do you find over time that
your Outreach methods need to change to
attract new developers what are just
kind of your insights with this kind of
like word vomit idea that I just threw
your way it's a great question and um I
also know the Neo project by the way
I've been at the Neo conference when was
it in I think it was in 2018 when it was
in San Francisco I was there too that
was my first crypto conference ever oh
awesome awesome so uh Neo has always
been pushing also for very interesting
ideas how how to upgrade the existing
economy through the through the usage of
smart contracts and I think you know
it's it again comes uh into this
question of what are we doing and why
are we doing it and uh we see already
from web 2 startups so to speak like uh
from Legacy startups uh in a way
investors know that boring projects are
not necessarily a bad projects and those
projects uh create value over time and
they need to they maybe address a real
pressing need I think in that sense it's
the world is big and the the needs are
there that need to be tackled maybe
maybe it's not the first use case to
have decentralized storage used for defy
if it's not needed at all but we do see
a lot of even non-blockchain use cases
that uh could benefit from using
decentralized storage in that sense we
see also what I like uh and what I'm
very happy about it uh some hacker
conferences for example where a lot of
hackers have a bit blockchain can also
have like very negative image in certain
certain circles because it's connected
to many scams to pumping the tokens Etc
things like that and in those blockchain
skeptical circles swarm is actually
always welcome because there's the idea
centralized storage can serve so much
more and in that sense what I also kind
of see our role in a bit is even to
create a bridge between the Legacy
economy and the new emerging economy and
hopefully also growing the existing
space through that bringing bringing new
Enterprises new projects uh into the
world of blockchain so I think it's we
just need to persist work and hopefully
we don't have an out of time before we
have things done so yeah that brings up
a really interesting question a lot of
the guests that have been on the smart
economy pod that are in the traditional
Finance banking realm have started
acknowledging that these public
architectures uh might be more cost
efficient for a bank to implement rather
than having to spend billions of dollars
a year to maintain their in-house
centralized softwares so are you seeing
a growth in traditional companies that
are looking towards decentralized
storage as a as an option are we getting
to a point where it's more cost
effective maybe for some Enterprises or
for some companies to use a swarm over
AWS so there's actually quite quite a
lot to unpack first Enterprises
I would describe them as lagers they are
the latest to join and adopt new new
technology they need that department
needs you know like track records see
like how how the network performs
stability Etc they also today still need
let's say centralized intermediaries
between the decentralization and
whatever
having said this we do see quite a lot
of interest in uh coming more from r d
teams from how they look where things
are going to evolve and uh also this is
not just because of the technology but
also because the world is changing so we
see uh data for example we can say the
automotive industry everybody in the
automotive industry is working on
self-driving cars at the same time all
of them have the same issue the same
problem that they don't have enough big
data sets to train their AI to do a good
job
so these Enterprises these are companies
they do need to collaborate and they do
they do need to put the data sets
together now the same applies to the
energy sector and other sectors quite
often the question arises there is where
do we store the data and everybody says
oh we can use our servers which is good
for those who uh who use the for their
service but not for the others and
decentralized storage here the
Breakthrough one of the breakthroughs
that it does is that all the parties
know that they're accessing the same
data and they don't need to trust each
other so we can definitely hear I think
there's tremendous value to be unlocked
now in comparison uh this Center store
decentralized storage and AWS Solutions
and things like that again this goes
with what I said before that I'm not any
maximalist in that sense there's always
going to be use cases where AWS just is
better to use because maybe we don't
even need a decentralization for that
solution in that sense I usually also
point out that uh the cost structure is
not really comparable because what's one
does swarm complements the blockchain it
continues there it complements the
blockchain with big data with private
data sensitive data so to enable data
reach applications in web3 now how much
does censorship resistance cost how much
does it go how much is it worth how much
is privacy work for some use cases we
just in the same way as why we use the
blockchain for computation and not
Google compute Cloud we just need to use
decentralized storage
there are also very interesting use
cases that we see in the Enterprise
sector that are possible just with this
Paradigm change that can't be really
done so well with AWS so Swan is an
immutable storage now in the Enterprise
context this could also mean that it's a
ransomware proof because ransomware
cannot change the existing data it just
needs to upload new encrypted data
doesn't run somewhere and so on does not
make sense or when we look at what's
happening in Europe where there was gdpr
started years ago so today in Europe you
come to a website you need to click a
lot and give like consents to the
website to the company behind it now
this consent is just being saved in that
database but the user forgets it the
moment they switch the tab they forget
what kind of content they get now again
this is a very simple simple thing to do
it's store gdpr constant receipts on
Swarm the users know what they what kind
of concerns they gave and the
Enterprises also can access it but at
the same time what happens is the
Enterprise has offloaded personal data
to the user so they also reduce their
risk they have become less of a Honeypot
they have decreased their compliance
costs in this case in Europe Etc so it's
a multitude of factors I would say it's
really I would not dare to really make
any predictions how much the storage
will cost on Swarm in a year or two I
think this is something where we will
meet basically more time to also observe
the behavior and the solutions that are
built on top of form yeah that makes
sense to build the economic model based
as usage comes along and also very fair
to not make any predictions predictions
can be the downfall
so kind of wrapping up
um there are two things I wanted to
touch on but while you were talking
about the automotive companies requiring
these large data sets and not wanting to
store their data on another on a
competitor's storage Network the fair
data Society kind of popped into my mind
so can you just share a little bit about
what Fair data Society is how swarm
Foundation supports it who participates
in this is it a protocol is it a
collaboration of people entities could
you just share a little bit more yes uh
glad to do it so it's first and foremost
which is maybe a bit of also
unsatisfying answer I would say fair
data Society is an idea is an idea that
it's solidifying around several thousand
initiatives and projects why the swan
support Fair data Society is exactly
because we just don't want to build a
technical solution or it's not just
about inventing how the storage
incentives might work for that we could
be a university Department put out
papers that's it as Engineers we just
also don't want to see the solution to
to work but we want to see positive
social impact happening and in other
words we would like to see our our staff
being used for good things and I think
that kind of resonates with the big
majority of the developers especially in
this in this space now looking at swarm
and the base layer there are things that
are very important to us exactly for
this good use but that are also outside
of our scope so when we speak about data
interoperability between apps or apps
data interoperability is a requirement
for data sovereignty it's a it's an
antidote towards uh for data silences so
we really do want to support data
interoperability but on the base layer
there's not much that can be done so
it's kind of in that way we see it also
as our moral responsibility to do what
we can do in order to support the
ecosystem developing in the desired
Direction
and other other values that uh basically
better data Society in a way is an
initiative where the tech meets the
social when we also speak about the
ethics so again on Sloan's layer it's
just chunks going back and forth between
the notes it's ones and zeros it's a lot
of these questions are not directly
related at the same time we also do not
consider ourselves as philosophers as
ethicists and you know I'm personally
very much against that companies write
their own ethics chapters it kind of
incorporates their biases but while
making them feel good and the ethics and
that kind of discussion it's about
figuring out what kind of world what
kind of future do we want to live in and
connecting and going towards that in
that sense also fed data Society does
extend and wants to extend beyond sworn
sworn just incubated it and helped it to
grow but you know when we speak about
privacy or any other these things this
does not end with sworn so it's it's
more about our effort to steer and
enrich the conversation in figuring out
what we are building it's not just about
figuring out how something works yeah
that's that's fascinating Insight really
really great to hear how a collective of
Engineers is trying to create a
ubiquitous set of Ethics that go beyond
just their entity or what project
they're working on so we're we're
running out of time and usually I like
to end the interview with uh what are
you excited about upcoming that swarm
might launch but I'm just gonna
interpose kind of what I want to hear
you talk about next and that's Odyssey
the web3 computer so could you share a
little bit about the roadmap for this
new computer that swarm is working on
and just tell us a little bit about it
sure uh happy happy to do that so in a
way in a way one could think of the
Swarm Odyssey the vet 3 PC as like a
Google Chrome book without Google it's
here we try we try also to explore and
look at the concepts of being local
first and extending seamlessly into
swarm into the decentralized storage so
in that way our data is with us but also
available we can just plug into that
data from anywhere uh we want now one
itself this is exactly one of these uh
one of these examples Swan Foundation
does not directly work on the vector PC
but we do see it as an important step
towards a self-sovereign future and it's
uh we'd like to support the ecosystem
with it the central uh Central values of
the project are things like privacy data
interoperability and data sovereignty
that I mentioned and at the same time we
are here we do see it as an exploration
with our ecosystem with our guarantees
and participants
how can we basically connect the dots
into something meaningful and purposeful
so in that sense the web3 PC this one or
they say it it's not planned to be like
a hardware product or anything or a new
operating system on its own maybe in a
in a very simplified way it could even
be just considered as its own
distribution that actually sets up
everything in a seamless way and again
the concept should not be limited to
just swollen it should Encompass other
Solutions and actually draw on the
richness of the of the ecosystem it
should empower the freedom of the person
who uses it awesome there were so many
topics that we didn't get to discuss
like hosting decentralized websites and
the grants that swarm Foundation offers
and the types of projects that SF is
trying to incentivize and the types of
Builders you guys are trying to attract
but maybe we can save that for another
podcast on another day Gregor thank you
so much for sharing an hour of your time
with us this was a fascinating
conversation I really enjoyed hearing
your thoughts your Concepts talking with
an OG Builder someone who's been
building on the same projects for
multiple years it's always refreshing to
run into folks like you who have stuck
through thick and thin with a project so
I just want to thank you so much for for
coming to share an hour with us today
thank you very much for the invite Dylan
I found also your questions to be very
thoughtful and it also gave the
possibility to explore Concepts outside
of swan so it basically we could speak a
lot about the context in which we are
and why we are doing this and hopefully
we are happy to continue the
conversation anytime awesome well thank
you so much for joining and uh
definitely looking forward to catching
up again thank you cheers
well what did you think of that
conversation
I thought it was super interesting to
learn more about how swarm has adapted
to the changes of the blockchain
industry specifically how the project
has evolved towards a multi-chain thesis
it was also really cool to hear Gregor
highlight how he thinks this technology
can be used to empower people by giving
them control over their data and I will
definitely be keeping an ear to the
ground for Enterprises that begin to
drop breadcrumbs about adding
decentralized storage to their Tech
stack on that note I want to thank you
so much for taking the time to listen to
the smart economy podcast if you liked
what you heard and want to support the
show please keep Neo news today in mind
when voting for your Neo Council
representative as part of Neo's
governance process we appreciate you and
look forward to catching you next time
thank you